README FILE

30/01/2018

Dataset of assessment for prominent exostosis projecting from the occipital squama

University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia
research-repository@usc.edu.au

1. Introduction

Pervasive skeletal morphological adaptations in modern humans are rare. Nevertheless, in our earlier article (above) we reported the development of prominent exostosis in the skulls of young adults (41%; 10 - 31 mm) emanating from the external occipital protuberance (EOP), the site at which the upper trapezius muscle tendon fibers and ligamentum nuchae attach to the occipital squama. The focus of our current investigation was to identify the distribution of enlarged EOP (EEOP) in a wider age spectrum of the population (n=1200, age 18 - 86). Here we show that sex, the degree of forward head protraction (FHP) and age predicted the presence of EEOP in 72.3 % of those studied. Males were 5.48 times more likely to have EEOP than females, and every increase in FHP resulted in a 1.03 times increased likelihood of EEOP. However, every incremental increase in age group (by decade) resulted in a 0.98 decrease in the likelihood of having an EEOP. This is surprising, as the frequency and severity of degenerative skeletal features in humans are associated typically with the ageing and are, therefore, more likely to be observed in the elderly.


2. Copyright and Notification

The copyright for the data contained in the collection resides with Livingwell Chiropractic, Sippy Downs, Queensland, Australia, and has been shared under the Creative Commons 4.0 Attribution Licence.  If you publish results based on this data, please acknowledge its use.  Refer to the data collection as "Dataset of assessment for prominent exostosis projecting from the occipital squama", and refer to the current location of the data (see "Availability").


3. Availability

Cite as: Shahar, David, Sayers, Mark (2018) Dataset of assessment for prominent exostosis projecting from the occipital squama, University of the Sunshine Coast, Queensland, http://dx.doi.org/10.4227/39/5a7104bc0ae51

Besides the README file, the collection consists of 1 data files.  If you have any questions about the collection, email research-repository@usc.edu.au


4. History & Acknowledgements

The data files in this collection were made available by the University of the Sunshine Coast and Livingwell Chiropractic.


5. Formatting

One (1) Microsoft Excel file, 70KB.


6. Collection Parameters

Data was collected over the period January 2015 to June 2017 at Livingwell Chiropractic.


7. Specialised Software Used, if applicable

Microsoft Excel.


8. Relationship with any ancillary datasets outside of this dataset, if applicable

None provided.


9. Methodology for sample

Not provided.


10.Resources, such as books, articles, serials, and/or data files, if any, that served as source of this data collection

Not provided.

